I seriously wanted to preface that with, "For the LAST time..." but, let's be honest. This will not be the last time I preach about the wonders of one of nature-F¢s most perfect and healthy foods. The wonderful substance still vilified even by well-meaning but misinformed doctors, nutritionists, and health-conscious consumers.-A

It drives me absolutely crazy to hear about people dogging on my butter. Just the other day, I was talking with a group of people I had recently met, who had gotten onto the topic of cooking. One mentioned how a certain food blogger (who shall remain nameless) had such delicious-looking recipes, but that she wouldn't try them because they had "like a cup of butter per serving!" This of course was met with laughter by the rest of the group, while I forcibly bit my tongue.

"Yeahhh... her recipes are unhealthy because of the toxic vegetable oils, refined sugars, and fake, processed flour in them - the butter is their only redeeming quality!!" I thought to myself, feigning a smile.

*sigh*

Poor butter. You've done nothing but nourish my body and keep me healthy. I won't stand for the lies being spread about you!

If you are a Real Food-er, you already know how great this stuff is. Butter is full of essential vitamins and nutrients, and that all-important dose of saturated fat our bodies crave down to a cellular level.

Listen to this glorious little testimony from the Queen of Butter herself - her Highness - Ms. Sally Fallon Morell (also author of Nourishing Traditions and president and founder of the Weston A. Price Foundation, you know... as her day job).

Butter is amazing.

Now, if you are still doubting that butter is a miraculously healthy food, or thinking that even if it may have some good qualities - that the fat in butter logically leads to making YOU fat - let's just go ahead and have a look at Exhibit A - me. As you may know, I have had a lifelong struggle with being chronically underweight and "failing to thrive."

I still am underweight.

I'm too self-conscious to tell you how much I actually weigh, but I will say that my GOAL is to get into the triple digits.

I CONSUME OVER A POUND OF BUTTER A WEEK.

I gave this blog its name for a reason, people!

NO, I am not a freak of human genetics with some magical, get-out-of-fat-jail-free strand of DNA.

It's NOT that I have "high metabolism."

I'm NOT "lucky" in any way when it comes to this - my body is no more resistant to gaining fatty tissue from butter than anyone else's.

We are all dealt the same hand when it comes to how our bodies process the short-and-medium-chain fatty acids ever-present in the saturated fat component of butter.

Saturated fat gives you energy, not fatty tissue.

My friends over at the WAPF have got my back.

"The notion that butter causes weight gain is a sad misconception. The short and medium chain fatty acids in butter are not stored in the adipose tissue, but are used for quick energy. Fat tissue in humans is composed mainly of longer chain fatty acids. 15 These come from olive oil and polyunsaturated oils as well as from refined carbohydrates. Because butter is rich in nutrients, it confers a feeling of satisfaction when consumed. Can it be that consumption of margarine and other butter substitutes results in cravings and bingeing because these highly fabricated products don't give the body what it needs?"

Uh, yes. Yes it can be, ignorant butter-haters of America! I plan on writing up another post with more detail about those things which actually do make you fat. But can we just all agree for now that butter is not the gut-growing, thunder-thigh-inducing, flab-fattening devil it's been portrayed as for the past half a century?

Don't fear butter.

Don't accuse it of such terrible things.

And sheesh - please stop making fun of it!

= SO NOT TRUE!!
