My two Generational Dynamics books are available and can be read for free online by anyone wishing to learn the details of generational theory. Even though both of those books are now a bit out of date, and have been supplanted by a great deal of additional research that has been posted on this web site, they're still the best source for someone willing to take the time to read them.

The purpose of this article is to summarize the major concepts of Generational Dynamics for those who wish to get started.

Generational Dynamics analyzes history through the flow of generations, and identifies generational patterns that repeat in all places and times in history. This has provided a methodology that has proven very useful for analyzing and understanding historical events, but also for forecasting future trends.

This web site has been a test site for Generational Dynamics since it was set up in 2003. There are over 1,000 articles posted, most containing specific Generational Dynamics predictions. All of those predictions have come true, or are trending true. None has been shown to be false. There is no analyst, journalist, politician or web site in the world with anything close to the predictive success of this web site.

Note that Generational Dynamics does not predict actual events. What it predicts is the public reactions to unpleasant events. It predicts the attitudes and behaviors of large masses of people, entire generations of people.

In a nutshell, Generational Dynamics denies the frequently held claim that wisdom is passed down from generation to generation. To the contrary, new generations tend to make the same mistakes that their great-great-grandparents did. So if a society makes a "mistake" that causes a genocidal crisis war, then the newer generations will make the same "mistake" as soon as the survivors of the previous war die.

Crisis wars and the Artist Generation

A generational saeculum is a period of roughly 70-90 years (the maximum length of a human lifetime) that represents one entire generational cycle. To understand what happens, let's look at America, starting from the Great Depression.

Imagine that you're a child growing up during the Great Depression and World War II. Unless you're over age 70 today, then you have NO IDEA what that's like. Here are some of the things that you live through:

Your friends, and possibly your own family, lose everything in the Great Depression, become homeless, have to live under a bridge or in a tent city with other homeless people.
Hunger and starvation are all around you. You and your parents and friends have to stand in long lines to visit a soup kitchen every day to get your only meal - a bowl of soup.
The world is shocked by the Pearl Harbor attack. Your family, your teachers and your friends can't talk about anything else.
Your fathers and brothers and your friends' fathers and brothers are tortured and imprisoned in the Bataan Death March, after everyone had expected an easy victory in the Pacific. You may even become orphaned.
Your sisters and mothers do their patriotic duty and take "Rosie the Riveter" jobs that they hate.
And it's even worse for the people in London, who are being bombed several times a day. They go through a "9/11-type trauma" several times a day for 2-3 years.
Your fathers and brothers and your friends' fathers and brothers pour onto the beaches of Normandy where they're shot down like fish in a barrel.
Your family is joyous that the war ends, but they're shocked by what brought it to an end: A horrible new "atom bomb," a weapon of mass destruction that can kill tens of thousands of people in minutes.
Children who grow up under such desolate circumstances are really abused children, and so you grow up indecisive, sensitive, caring, and glad just to be alive, deeply pained by your many losses. This experience determines the path of your entire life. You're determined that you'll spend your life doing everything you can to guarantee that your children never have to suffer that way.

Furthermore, it's not just you. Every child in your generation has suffered the same way, has had the same kinds of losses. Your entire generation shares an experience that your own children will never understand, but that's OK, because you'll warn them about it, and you'll help them do the right thing.

Terminology: World War II is an example of a Crisis War for America, taking place during a Crisis Era. Children growing up during a crisis era are in a Artist Generation archetype, so named because they grow up to be indecisive, sensitive, caring, and glad just to be alive. The generation born during WW II is called the "Silent Generation" -- so named by Time Magazine during the 1950s because they never complained about anything.

Previous: America's previous Crisis War was the Civil War. The Artists that grew up during the Civil War were called the "Progressive Generation."


Recovery Era (First Turning) and the Prophet Generation

Now imagine something completely different: You're born just before the war ends, or after the war ends.

You didn't suffer during the war, because you weren't born yet. Instead, you enjoy all the benefits of the war being over -- a nice home, good schools, and so forth. But most important, your parents treasure you. They had waited until after the war to have you, and they want you to be the happiest child in the world. They shower you with attention, and they satisfy your every whim. You get used to getting your way. All they ask is that you just follow a few simple rules of life -- save your money, work hard, know your place, and don't get people angry.

Meanwhile, your parents' generation is healing the world. The people who survived World War II did some great things -- they created the United Nations, World Bank, Green Revolution, World Health Organization, International Monetary Fund, and so forth. They put laws and procedures in place to guarantee that the Great Depression would never happen again, that famines would never happen again, and that there would be no need for war. They created these organizations and managed them for decades with one purpose in mind: That their children and grandchildren would never have to go through World War III.

Your parents were extremely generous to other nations in trouble. They spent money on the Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe, and they also helped rebuild other countries that had been destroyed by the war.

Your parents did other things to prevent World War III: They believed that if they had stopped Hitler and Naziism in 1935, then they would have prevented WW II; and they believed that they had to stop Communism to prevent WW III. So they fought the Korean war to stop Communism from spreading into South Korea, and they fought the Vietnam war to stop Communism from spreading into South Vietnam.

Your parents' motto was: It doesn't matter how much it costs to prevent WW III, because the cost will be tiny compared to the cost of fighting WW II.

By the time the 1960s came along, you were reaching adulthood, and you were getting very pissed off at your parents, and you fought all the time. You were sick of being told to save your money. You were sick of being told you had to fight in Vietnam. You began to see your parents' rules as oppression against women and minority groups, and their concerns about Communism as an obsession. When they brag about how capitalism beat the Depression and Nazis, you see them as just materialistic.

You start to "rebel." You grow your hair long if you're a boy, and cut it short if you're a girl. You burn your draft card if you're a boy, and you burn your bra if you're a girl. You start a women's lib movement, an anti-racism movement, a sexual freedom movement, and an anti-war movement -- rejecting all of your parents' values. You demonstrate and riot. It's the "generation gap."

Terminology: The period following the end of a Crisis War is called a Recovery Era, and it generally lasts 15-20 years. Children born and growing up during a Recovery era are in an Prophet Generation archetype, so named because they provide the spiritual guidance to the country for much of their lives. Because of the way their parents treated them, they become arrogant and narcissistic, and always expect to get their own way. The generation born after WW II is called the "Baby Boomer Generation," because of the "baby boom" that followed the end of WW II.

Previous: America's previous Crisis War was the Civil War. The Prophets who were born near the end or after the Civil War were called the "Missionary Generation."


Awakening Era (Second Turning) and the Nomad Generation

Once again, your imagination changes in a new direction. Now imagine you were born just before or after the time that the Boomers were beginning to riot and demonstrate against their parents' values.

Things are very different for you this time. (And incidentally, by now you should begin to understand why each generation has a vastly different world view than the others do.)

The older kids -- the Boomers -- were pampered. They always got their way. They would kick and scream and throw tantrums, and riot and demonstrate, and everyone listened to them and eventually gave in to them.

But that doesn't happen to you and kids in your generation. Nobody listens to you, because they're all listening to the Boomers. Older people always cut you off in mid-sentence. If there's something you want, all you get is a lecture about why you're wrong.

Gradually, you begin to believe that older people are full of crap. Your attitude toward them varies from dislike to scorn to hatred. Your view begins to coincide with that of Democratic Party strategist and Clinton aide Paul Begala, who wrote:

"I hate the Baby Boomers. They're the most self-centered, self-seeking, self-interested, self-absorbed, self-indulgent, self-aggrandizing generation in American history. As they enter late middle age, the Boomers still can't grow up. Guys who once dropped acid are now downing Viagra; women who once eschewed lipstick are now getting liposuction."
Terminology: The period that begins about 15-20 years after the end of the Crisis war is called the Awakening Era, and it generally lasts around 20 years. It begins when the Prophets begin to demonstrate and rebel against their parents (a "generation gap"), and it's characterized by political and social upheavals, often including occasional low-level violence. Socially and politically, the society moves towards valuing the rights of the individual (women's rights, minority rights), and away from the rights of the society as a whole.

Children born and growing up just before and during an Awakening era are in the Nomad Generation archetype, so named because they're disaffected with and disoriented within society. The generation born in America in the 1960s and 1970s has been named Generation-X. Because of their disaffection, Nomads tend to become scornful of, and sometimes nihilistic towards the entire society and its values.

Previous: The previous Nomad generation, born in the 1890s and 1900s decade, has been named by historians as the "Lost Generation," because of their disaffection with society after having had to fight in World War I.


Unraveling Era (Third Turning) and the Hero Generation

This time, imagine that you were born in the 1980s or 1990s. It's a very different country from earlier decades. It used to be that the country was fighting Communism, but now the country seems to have no direction at all, and all that the adults do is bicker with one another. Even your own life seems to have no direction, especially if you're a child of divorce and your parents do nothing but bicker with each other, and you don't know from week to week whether you'll be spending the weekend with your mother or your father.

In many ways, your yearnings are the opposite of the those of the Prophet generation that grew up in the 1950s. While they chafed under the austere rules, you yearn for a life of more structure and stability. While they made everything into a battle, you'd really like some peace and quiet. While they often despised their parents, you worry about your parents and their welfare. This makes you a very different kind of person than the Boomers or the Gen-Xers, with a completely different view of life and the world.

Terminology: The period that begins about 40 years after the end of the last Crisis war is called Unraveling Era or Third Turning, and it generally lasts around 20 years. It has this name because, by this time, the new structures and austere rules that the Crisis war survivors had instituted during the First Turning have almost completely unraveled. This is a time of maximum rights for the individual, and minimum concern for survival of the society as a whole.

Children born and growing up just before and during an Unraveling era are in the Hero Generation archetype, so named because they grow up to be the foot soldiers who fight the next Crisis war. The generation born in America in the 1980s and 1990s has been named the Millennial Generation.

Previous: The previous Hero generation, born in the 1910s and 1920s, is known as the "GI Generation," because they were the "greatest generation" that fought and won WW II.


Crisis Era (Fourth Turning) and the Regeneracy

America and many other countries have been entering a "Crisis Era" since the early 2000s -- not because of 9/11, but because the survivors of World War II are rapidly disappearing (retiring or dying), leaving Boomers in charge of most government, business, and education organizations.

The problem with Boomers is that they have no governing or leadership skills. They only know how to argue, and they learned that during the 1960s and 1970s. In country after country around the world -- France, Britain, Israel, Japan, China, South Africa, the U.S. and elsewhere -- governments are becoming increasingly paralyzed, and leaders are getting lower and lower approval ratings.

The reason for this paralysis is that the generations that survived WW II are gone now. Those people did some great things -- they created the United Nations, World Bank, Green Revolution, World Health Organization, International Monetary Fund, and so forth. They created these organizations and managed them for decades with one purpose in mind: That their children and grandchildren would never have to go through anything so horrible as World War II. Now all those people are gone, and the people left behind have no idea what's going on or what to do. They're unable to lead or govern. All they know how to do is whine and complain, and wait until the next disaster, the next world war, forces them to do great things as well.

Right behind the Boomers are the disaffected members of Generation-X. The Gen-Xers are frustrated and furious at what they see as the incompetence of Boomers. This frustration, which is true of Nomad archetypes throughout history, leads them to become somewhat nihilistic and self-destructive.

Together, the incompetent Boomers and the nihilistic Gen-Xers form a potentially lethal combination. Motivated by fury and anger at Boomers for doing nothing, the Gen-Xers rush in to "do something", and the things they do can be disastrous -- lead to world war, lead to financial disaster. The Boomers, who are serving as senior level managers throughout government, business and education, might be expected to control these Xer impulses, but being totally blind and incompetent means that the Gen-Xers have a free hand. It's this lethal combination that's already destroyed the world financial system, and will undoubtedly do worse.

When does a Crisis ERA turn into a Crisis WAR?

From the point of view of Generational Dynamics, this question has a specific answer: it's a point of time defined in generational theory and known as the "regeneracy." The regeneracy is the point in time where an event, or series of events (like the Pearl Harbor attack and the Bataan death march in World War II or the Battle of Bull Run in the Civil War) unify a country or society behind its leader, and the survival of the country and its way of life become the highest priority, higher than the value of an individual life. This change opens the door to genocidal acts, since an individual human life has little value any more.

It's impossible to predict what event will trigger the regeneracy -- possibly a major terrorist attack on American soil, or possibly a major military defeat overseas -- but this event will end the political bickering, will unify the country once more, and will send the young Millennial generation off to war.
